---
layout: post
title: "Balance"
tags: [Non-Tech]
description: "Having something that grounds you and doesn't involve staring at a liquid crystal display whatsoever is vital to feeling balanced in day-to-day life."
---

When I was young, I never understood why my dad liked splitting and burning
firewood so much.

Every summer, my brother and I would play our parts.  We'd haul large logs cut
by my dad's chainsaw from some fallen tree in the area (with permission, of
course) in his pickup truck to our backyard. Then we'd split them by axe and
hammer and stack the pieces at the bottom of the hill to season. Lastly, we'd
take a previous years' stash from the other side of our wood stack and place
them in a large red wheelbarrow and haul them up the hill to then re-stack in
neat piles against the side of the house next to the patio door for the coming
winter.

When the extreme Minnesotan cold set in, my dad would then burn a
fire nearly every evening (and sometimes, morning) in the wood burning stove to
heat the house, just needing to lean out the patio door for the season's wood
supply.

Almost all of my friend's families either didn't bother utilizing their
fireplace (you could just turn up the furnace, of course) or had gas ones. With
the latter you could just touch a button and a nice fire magically appeared! No
dreaded hauling of firewood all afternoon on summer weekends. No having to
build a fire with the previous week's newspaper. No scooping out old ash from
the stove or getting on the roof every year and sending a brush up and down the
chimney to clean it out.

What's more is that my dad looked genuinely happy to be out splitting firewood.

He seemed very pleased in the winter evenings with a roaring fire going and a
beer in hand, but that was easy to understand. It was the splitting and the
hauling and all the overhead in the summertime that I was baffled about. When I
was older (and my brother went off to school and I was left to pick up all his
slack...) I finally asked him about it.

He explained that being in IT, things like wood burning and fishing and the
outdoors were the antidote to his technology filled workweek. After a full day
of sitting in front of a computer screen and working with people and their
endless computer issues, spending quiet time outside in the sun and fresh air,
either alone or with his boys, provided a balance to his life that was
important to maintain.

---

After becoming an experienced software developer I've come to understand my
dad's insistence of balance between technology and the simple things in life
more and more over the years. It needn't be burning wood or even the outdoors
at all - but I now firmly believe that having something that grounds you and
doesn't involve staring at a liquid crystal display whatsoever is vital to
feeling balanced in day-to-day life.

I enjoy bonfires, and when I moved back to Minnesota last summer I had to
use some (gasp) purchased firewood from the gas station (Yeah, we have that here.
Is that weird?). The wood burned incredibly poorly; it was obvious that it was
newly split wood and completely unseasoned. I would have to take time and build
the perfect structure to start, and constantly shift things around to get it to
burn evenly.

This experience was “frustrating”. But in an amazing,
I’m-so-happy-it’s-not-another-software-problem sort of way.

I wasn't digging through stack traces trying to find where some 3rd party
library accidentally made a breaking change in their latest patch release. I
wasn't mulling over the best approach to make some major change to the core
architecture of an application to avoid breaking things and pissing off untold
numbers of customers (with said major change being a precondition to
implementing the feature said customer had been asking about, of course).

I wasn't continuing to ask for minimal examples of that phantom issue that
multiple people have reported but no one can narrow down. I wasn't getting DM'd
about remembering some small caveat from code written years ago regarding
that one thing that kept me up all night or all weekend and I'd
rather just forget about forever.

I wasn't doing any of those things. *But I was debugging!* I was debugging
something completely and utterly different, applying all the same logical
processing of thoughts.  I was trying to make some pile of shitty wood burn.
Which piece should I add next? Is this one too thick?  Does it seem drier than
that piece? Maybe I should wait until the fire is hotter to burn this bad one.
Where on the fire would it burn the best? Is there enough airflow there? Will
the structure collapse if I try and move that corner?

Debugging under the stars with a bottle of bourbon and the sound of crickets
and loons as my work playlist. It's this sort of disconnection from our
always-online society that keeps my balance.

I _love_ technology, software, and the communities that support it. I work
remotely, and while I try to keep a healthy separation between work and home
I'm too passionate about what I do to completely evict programming from my mind
the moment the clock hits 5pm. I might merge pull-requests and read emails
after a typical work day. I talk shop constantly on the weekends and speak at
conferences. I check Twitter too often. I do all these things because I'm
fortunate enough to be paid to do something that I _really_ love doing a lot.

If I do nothing but these things for too long, I become a mess. It's not
something I even notice (which is the worst part), not suddenly. I just begin
to become this zombie of a person, only caring about getting that low priority
bugfix I wrote merged or some issue closed or some CFP submitted. Slowly but
surely the road to burnout begins.

But disconnecting and concentrating on other things is my antidote. I've
developed a _huge_ affinity towards hiking. I play organized hockey twice a
week. I love burning fires and getting lost in the night sky. And as a former
orchestral musician, I enjoy reading some old charts every now and then.

**Find something that you love that has absolutely nothing to do with software
and technology. Learn a skill that uses your hands beyond touching keycaps.
Pour yourself in to it. I think you'll find that it will give you a balance
that makes you all the more concentrated and effective as a software developer
when you open up that text editor in the morning.**
